---
title: "Format"
published: true
morea_id: reading-format
morea_summary: "Exam cycles, weekly routine, studying, and group work."
morea_type: reading
morea_sort_order: 3
---

By "routines" I mean our periodic patterns of activity: what happens in a
typical class, a typical week, and a typical exam and assignment cycle. This
page tells you what I will do and what you will be expected to do on a
recurring basis.

## Exam Cycles

There are three midterm exams covering the core material. The first two are
given one full week after the last problem set on the exam topics was due, so
you have time to get feedback on homework problems. Due to the university
cutoff for midterm exams, the third is held the week after the relevant topics
are covered. The first exam is at least half review of 211 and 241: results
are returned before the withdrawal date so you can assess whether you are
ready for ICS 311.

## Weekly Routine

On most weeks we cover one book chapter/topic in each of the two classes (two
chapters per week). The exceptions are the first two weeks when we are getting
our bearings and covering material that must be understood to comprehend the
rest of the semester; the weeks we have midterms; and the chapter that
introduces graphs (we take a full week for it).

The pace is intense: set aside time almost every day for ICS 311. The basic
pattern is as follows:

**Saturdays:**
    

  * Instructor posts any updates to screencasts and notes for the material of the following week by Saturday night, and possibly earlier.
**Sundays:**
    

  * Projects will be due midnight* on a Sunday night.
**Mondays:**
    

  * Problem sets from the previous week are due midnight* the Monday after they are given.
  * Read or review material to understand Tuesday's topic (your choice of my podcasts, my web notes, the CLRS textbook chapter, other readings offered, and/or the MIT lecture videos).
  * Post any questions you have about the material in the appropriate Laulima discussion forum (instructor will review these after midnight when preparing for Tuesday's class). 
**Tuesdays:**
    

  * The online quiz for Tuesday's chapter is due 30 minutes before class (by 2:30pm).
  * See "Class Routine" below.
**Wednesdays:**
    

  * Read or review material to understand Thursday's topic.
  * Post any questions you have about the material in the appropriate Laulima discussion forum.
**Thursdays:**
    

  * The online quiz for Thursday's chapter is due 30 minutes before class (by 2:30pm).
  * See "Class Routine" below.
  * Problem sets for the weekend are usually posted Thursday evening.
**Fridays through the weekend:**
    

  * Use to do problem sets and/or projects in preparation for Sunday deadlines, and to watch screencasts and read book chapters. 

* "Midnight": The deadline in Laulima will be set to 23:55 (11:55 pm) on the due date, to avoid any ambiguity of which day "00:00" refers to. Upload your solutions before midnight. There will be a 5 minute grace period just in case of network delays. The three projects can be submitted late for 1% off per hour up to 50% off, but the homework assignments cannot be late.

The Assistant Teaching Assistant will have lab hours on Mondays. This will be
your last chance for clarifications before assignments are due. Instructor
office hour will be Wednesdays (with some availability Monday by appointment).
Plan in advance for programming projects due Sundays.

## Class Routine

The focus of our 75 minute class will be student problem solving in groups,
with opportunites to get help. For at least the first part of the semester,
the groups will be formed anew _randomly_ each week. Each day you will solve a
series of conceptual problems and turn them in as a group for a group grade.
These problems prepare you to take on more substantial problems that you turn
in individually on Sunday. At that time you will also allocate points to group
members. (See [ Assessment](Assessment.html) for explanations of grading.)

Here are typical schedules for 75 minute classes: Adjustments to the class
routine will likely be made to meet current needs.

**Tuesdays:**
    

  * 5: Welcome and Administrative Comments
  * 5: Icebreaker for new groups (groups rotate weekly)
  * 5: Solution to previous weekend's homework (if applicable) 
  * 5: Solution to today's quiz. 
  * 5: Introduction to today's problem (including questions submitted in advance) 
  * 45 (or more): Problem solving session, due before end of class.
  * 5: Brief presentation of class problem solutions 
**Thursdays:**
    

  * 5: Welcome and Administrative Comments
  * 5: Discussion of Tuesday's problem (if needed) 
  * 5: Solution to today's quiz. 
  * 5: Introduction to today's problem (including questions submitted in advance) 
  * 45 (or more): Problem solving session, due before end of class.
  * 5: Brief presentation of class problem solutions 
  * 5: Discussion of homework problems 

Plan to **bring your laptop or tablet to classes** held in Webster 101 (but
not to exams in BusAd A101). You'll need a VGA connector if you want to be
able to project your laptop to your working group. Apple iPads can connect via
Apple TV. I'm not aware of another method. Of course, groups can function with
only one or two members having a projectable laptop, but it's better for you
if you can be an active participant. At least one person in each group should
have the textbook handy in class as well.

##  Other Comments

### Inverted Classroom

This class is "inverted" in the sense that lectures are recorded and made
available outside of class, and classroom time is used for what can only be
done in person: collaboration and helping each other.

Lectures have their advantages, but they have problems too. For most students
listening to lectures is too passive an activity. The temptation to daydream
or check Facebook may be too great, and it takes effort to keep your mind on
the material. Actual problem solving is more effective for learning. Also,
lectures are a form of "distance learning": though we are all in the same room
we might as well be at a distance, as there is little interaction. When I ask
working professionals what skills they want our students to have, being able
to collaborate in teams is ALWAYS mentioned on the first breath.

For these reasons, the inverted classroom puts lectures online so that
students who benefit from them can have them, and even review them repeatedly;
and uses the classroom time in ways that engage students more actively and
takes advantage of the unique opportunity provided by being in the same room.

### Studying Before Class and Quizzes

The online quizzes before class are of course intended to motivate students to
review the material before class. There is another motivation: If you don't
prepare in advance, you risk looking foolish in front of your peers, who may
be annoyed at you for being unprepared to help, and you'll miss a learning
opportunity. You don't want to get a reputation for being the person who is
not prepared. It's a small world: someday your peers may be able to influence
hiring decisions.

### Groups

Much has been published by researchers and practitioners on how to organize
groups for collaborative learning. My approach is based on this research and
my experience with this course.

During the first month, students will be assigned randomly to groups, rotating
to new groups each week to help you get to know each other. (A survey of
students fall 2013 indicated that many liked this format as it was a rare
opportunity to get to know other ICS students.) Also it helps prevent reliance
on dysfunctional relationships (e.g., freeloading and "the sucker effect"): a
student can't plan on being with someone who will do the work for him or her,
and after a while people figure out who to avoid when forming groups.

After the Midterm 1 exam, you may form voluntary groups. Students who form
voluntary groups will stay in them until the next midterm, at which time they
may elect to continue or disband. Other students will continue to be assigned
randomly.

Regardless of whether you are in random or voluntary groups, this is an
important opportunity to develop group collaboration skills and also to
develop a good reputation with your peers. It may affect whether you are
selected to be part of a good group in ICS 311, and I have seen some students
after graduation get hired while others fail to get a job because of the
reputations they had with their peers.

