---
title: "Course information"
published: true
morea_id: reading-course-info
morea_summary: "Student learning outcomes, textbook, instructor information."
morea_type: reading
morea_sort_order: 1
---

## Catalog Description

ICS 311 Algorithms (3 credits) Design and correctness of algorithms, including
divide-and-conquer, greedy and dynamic programming methods. Complexity
analyses using recurrence relations, probabilistic methods, and NP-
completeness. Applications to order statistics, disjoint sets, B-trees and
balanced trees, graphs, network flows, and string matching. Pre: 211 and 241,
or consent.

## SLOs (Student Learning Outcomes)

  * Students are aware of fundamental algorithms of computer science, and their associated data structures and problem solving techniques. 
  * Students can compose a problem formulation of a real-world problem mathematically.
  * Students can decide whether given pseudocode is correct for a given problem formulation; construct a counterexample if the given pseudocode is incorrect; and outline a proof for its correctness otherwise.
  * Students can design a correct algorithm for a given problem and describe the algorithm as pseudocode in a given pseudocode syntax.
  * Students can analyze the worst-case and best-case space and time complexities of a given algorithm.
  * Students can create a software program for accurately implementing an algorithm specified in pseudocode. Students can implement software objects meeting Abstract Data Type specifications.
  * Students can produce a software product including documentation for given requirements & design specifications.

_Comment:_ On the fall 2013 final exam one student wrote about a problem:

> "This question is too hard! We shouldn't have to know implementations we have not used before!"

I wrote back to thank the student for concisely expressing (the negation of)
exactly what this course _ is_ intended to teach! You may not "know" an
implementation you have not encountered before, but this course should prepare
you with the tools to analyze and make informed decisions about new
implementations.

Do not approach this course solely as a memorization task, where you can only
do algorithms you are trained to do, like a circus animal. We do want you to
learn a "catalog" of algorithms, but you should be understanding their
analyses as examples that enable you to analyze unexpected algorithms in the
future. This is essential for being successful in a fast changing field where
_you_ are expected to figure out whether a new idea will work, as _ you _ are
the computer scientist hired to do this.

## Textbook

Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest and Clifford Stein,
[Introduction to Algorithms, Third
Edition,](http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/) The MIT Press, 2009.

Students are advised to purchase the textbook, as this book will serve as a
lifelong reference (it is the second most cited publication in computer
science). Also, the exams will be open book but with no electronics permitted,
so the PDF version of the book won't help you there.

Students are also advised to keep their ICS 241 (Discrete Mathematics for
Computer Science) textbooks for reference.

## Instructor

[Daniel D. Suthers](http://www2.hawaii.edu/~suthers/)  
Professor of ICS

  * Office: POST 309B
  * Office Telephone: (808) 956-3890
  * Email: [suthers@hawaii.edu](mailto:suthers@hawaii.edu) (Put "ICS 311" in the subject line. Use Laulima for questions that may also apply to other students.)
  * Office Hours: Mondays 3:00-4:00, or by appointment. (It's best to let me know in advance if you plan to come to office hour. Please don't try to talk to me while I am setting up for class. Brief consultations at the end of class are OK unless I indicate that I need to leave.

## Teaching Assistant

Robert Ward  
M.S./Ph.D. Student in ICS

  * Office: POST 303 cubicle
  * Email: [rward@hawaii.edu](mailto:rward@hawaii.edu) (Put "ICS 311" in the subject line.)
  * Office Hours: TuTh 1-2:30 or by appointment.

## Assistant Teaching Assistant

Anthony Sarria  
ICS Undergrad and ICS 311 Survivor

  * Lab: POST 318A
  * Email: [aksarria@hawaii.edu](mailto:aksarria@hawaii.edu) (Put "ICS 311" in the subject line.)
  * Lab Hours: Mondays 3:15-6:15.

## Communications

**Questions about Course Content**:   In general, questions about course content such as concepts, clarifications of assignments, etc. should be posted to the Laulima discussion forum of the week. This is because (1) other students can see our responses there, and thus also benefit; and (2) other students may notice the question and answer before the instructor or TA notices it (though we will check daily). If you email us a question, we will post the reply in Laulima unless personal information is involved.

**Personal Topics**: For topics that are not of interest to other students or are personal, you may email us, or stop by office hours. (Of course you may also use office hours for course content questions.) If using email, put "ICS 311" in the subject line.

**Communication with other students (e.g., group members)**: You can send email to other students in the course using the Laulima "Mailtool". You don't need to know their real email address to do this.

##  Online Media

We use the **course website** [www2.hawaii.edu/~suthers/courses/ics311s14/](ww
w2.hawaii.edu/~suthers/courses/ics311s14/) for posting schedules and notes.

We use **[Laulima**](https://laulima.hawaii.edu/portal) for all other online
required course functions such as podcasts, quizzes, discussions and
submitting assignments. Please see [this document on everything Laulima users
should
know](http://www.hawaii.edu/talent/laulima_tab/tabs/laulima_essentials.html).

We will use **Google Docs** for in-class problem solving, as it supports
simultaneous editing.

Screencasts (videos) of lectures are available on **YouTube** and **iTunesU**
as well as Laulima (your choice). They are linked from the individual Notes
pages (Topic-XX.html).

